Group 10 Final Project
COVID-19 &amp;

Stock Performance Impact

Johnathan James, Rafat Mohammed, Paul Dudly Harris, Jason Klapmeier

Abstract

This project is an analysis of the currently available data surrounding the
coronavirus (COVID-19) in the United States and stock performance. Specifically, we have
taken stock performance of Carriage Services, Inc. and the NASDAQ index. Carriage
Services, Inc. (CSV) is a funeral home operator with over 200 locations across the United
States. Our hypothesis is that as the death and case count increases for COVID-19, the stock
performance of CSV will improve and inversely, NASDAQ should decline in performance.
We have taken daily data available for stocks and aggregated and averaged into weekly
data to compare to the weekly data for COVID-19. Included in the analysis of COVID-19 is
pneumonia and influenza deaths.

At the conclusion of this project, our hypothesis was only partially supported. In
part, our hypothesis was not supported because CSV’s stock performance worsened with
more COVID-19 deaths and cases. Furthermore, the overall NASDAQ index also improved
as COVID-19 deaths increased which refutes our original hypothesis, yet it continued to go
up at a faster rate when cases and deaths slowed.

INTRODUCTION

Whenever a significant event occurs, there are a number of factors people look to in
order to measure its impact. Among those factors is the stock market. In fact, the financial
reaction to the COVID-19 pandemic was more significant and larger than any other
financial response to a pandemic including the Spanish Flu (Baker et al. 2020). At the early
onset of the pandemic in March, the stock market had a wild response to the daily news of

more cases and deaths from COVID-19. Markets often dislike uncertainty, and the reaction
to this pandemic proved this maxim out time and again.
For this project, we wanted to take a deeper look into this wild reaction to the
COVID-19 pandemic. Was the situation as dire as we were told? Did the markets really have
a mega disaster? Were there segments within the stock market that out-performed the
NASDAQ index as a whole? We brought together multiple data sources to gain greater
insights into COVID-19 data and the economic fallout as measured by the stock market
indicators of CSV and the NASDAQ index.

METHODOLOGY

In this project, Group 10 researched and compared several COVID-19 statistics
datasets that would show deaths and cases by State as well as totals for the United States
with weekly granularity. Then, we compared these datasets to stock data from Yahoo
Finance for daily stock market performance aggregated into weekly performance. The
COVID-19 datasets we selected are from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention at
data.cdc.gov. The data is somewhat unique in that it shows not only deaths for each week
attributed to COVID, but also deaths by pneumonia and influenza. Additionally, this data
includes total “deaths from all causes of death” as collected by the CDC, to allow analysis of
a particular cause compared to totals of all causes.

Once the data was downloaded and reviewed, it was found that the values for all
columns and rows are complete where the State (jurisdiction of occurrence) is “United
States “. This was not the case for actual named States which includes DC and Puerto Rico.

There were missing values from an assortment of weeks (rows) and columns (different
causes of death). The group applied and discussed different ways to handle the NULL
values. These included using the column average of all States, average for each week, as
well as individual State mean to fill the missing data. However, as we looked closely at the
data in the table, there were some key State values that lead to our ultimate decision to
replace the values with zero (0). Some States had exceptionally low numbers of deaths in
all columns.

As an example, Alaska had a single entry of 10 flu deaths over the considered date
range (since March 1, 2020). Filling the 29 missing values with the Alaska average would
increase their flu deaths to 58 which seemed to be a considerable percentage change in
total for the column. Another example is Alabama COVID deaths. Although they had many
zero value entered weeks, their average was 97.2 and filling the few NULL values with this
made resulted in a 7% increase in their number of virus deaths. This seemed to be a similar
case for most States which we determined that null values could just as easily been left out
of the report to the CDC because there were no numbers to report. Therefore, we all agreed
to use 0 for all missing values.
In Python, we left the original csv data intact, and created new data frames that had
filled missing entries, sliced columns that were not required for our analysis, and subsets
starting March 1, 2020. The start date was to filter the data to provide changing data after
reviewing back into November 2019 and the COVID data was basically 0. We created two
data frames for analysis and visualization: United States and All States. We dropped
columns for “Data as of” and “start week”, selecting to go by the “End Week” date. The

“Group” and “Indicator” columns were also dropped as there are the same value for all
rows and appear to be part of the criteria used by CDC to create the base dataset we are
using.
In order to successfully join all datasets, we first created a dictionary to convert
state names to state abbreviations. This was done because some data had names while
others had abbreviations. Next, we created a Week Number column to act as the primary
key for all datasets. The intention behind this was because some data had daily, others had
weekly, and some had weekly data that was Monday through Friday, while others were
seven days a week. Using the Week Number created a single consistent point of reference
to account for these deviations.
The COVID-19 Case dataset was similar to the COVID-19 Deaths dataset. To munge
this dataset, we renamed several columns so across datasets, the same data was using the
same name. Additionally, this dataset had many unneeded columns, so we removed most of
the columns to limit the data to only the columns needed for analysis and insights.
Furthermore, this dataset had rows which referred to non-state observations, so these
were also removed. Finally, the dataset was grouped by state and week number in order to
make the join accurate for the final merge.
In order to test our hypothesis, we needed to merge data for CSV stock and the
NASDAQ. This required two separate datasets, however they were identical in structure
and therefore followed the same methodology for munging. Data was resampled into
weekly data from daily, a week number column was added, and categorical information
was added to qualify the closing data of the stock and NASDAQ. With the week number
column added, we were able to merge this data with the other combined datasets.

RESULTS

To our surprise, our hypothesis was partially refuted, but could also be argued to be
partially supported. First, an analysis of the NASDAQ performance during the pandemic
showed an initial and sudden response that could be attributed to trader emotion. In the
below visual, you can see a dramatic drop in average NASDAQ high when the pandemic
began.

However, after what could be described as public hysteria, died down, the market
began to rapidly recover. This, despite a significant increase in deaths, refuted our original
hypothesis. However, our hypothesis was partially supported because as the pandemic
continued and deaths slowed, the market continue to climb. The other part of our
hypothesis which was that CSV’s stock would get help from increased deaths, was totally
refuted.

Here, we can see a dramatic drop in the beginning of the pandemic – which
completely contradicts our original hypothesis, then an improvement in stock as the
pandemic slowed. We expected to see a positive correlation with the average stock highs,
but instead we got a statistically significant negative correlation of -.5553. If one was to just
look at the cumulative numbers, a person could argue that the stocks went up as the
cumulative number increased, but this would be faulty analysis. Instead, we looked at the
trend of both and found just the opposite. Here, meaningful application of this insight could
yield guidance to investors to not react out of emotion of a broadcast disaster nor assume a
given industry will out-perform the market as a whole simply because one would assume it
would benefit from said tragedy.
Throughout the COVID-19 experience, there have been many rumors, conflicting
news reports, conspiracy theories, and even denial that it really exists. During the research
and analysis of CDC reported data by our group, a comparison of COVID deaths to deaths
from common illnesses, that we take for granted, became very interesting.

The dataset used by Group 10 was obtained from the CDC (cdc.gov) that includes
weekly statistics by State as well as United States cumulative. It also includes the death
count officially attributed to Influenza, Pneumonia, and COVID. In the graph below, COVID
deaths are indicated in red and Pneumonia deaths are indicated in purple. In March, when
the “pandemic” fully began to take shape, the CDC reported 18,623 deaths due to
pneumonia and 2,259 deaths from the common flu, compared to the 3,814 deaths from
COVID. Pneumonia and the flu did not make the news. While COVID deaths peaked in April
(58,662) and May (46,688) and ahead of pneumonia, pneumonia also surged with death
counts of 43,622 and 34,580, respectively. Beginning in June and continuing to the present,
pneumonia and COVID related deaths stay reasonably close with pneumonia slightly ahead
in June and September.

One of the most confusing and predominate issues around the COVID pandemic is
the overwheling conflicting reports by the media, the government, the medical community,
and as discovered here, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The dataset from
the CDC used for this analysis has many missing values in all columns and across the full
time span for the State specific data, while the United States data is complete. Another part
of this report on the methodology used to fill those missing values appears elsewhere in

this report. However, it should be noted that this is an example of inconsistent data even
by the official agency at the heart of the reporting and control of the pandemic as is often
discussed by the public. Through Group 10’s early research comparing many COVID
datasets from supposedly reputable sources, the reported numbers vary dramatically. The
group made the decision to use what is reportedly from the official authority, the CDC.
During our in-depth stock analysis on correlations, we discovered that there is a .6-
.8 correlation between the Nasdaq stock prices and the stock prices of Carriage Services,
Inc (CSV). Once again, due to having over 200 locations nationally, we determined CSV
makes it a good indicator for stock of funeral homes in the United States.

We also discovered there was a -.31 to -.35 correlation between the total number of
COVID-19 cases and the number of shares traded for the Nasdaq and Carriage Services. 
These correlations are further illustrated by the second graphic. This discovery helps
answer the question of what the impact of COVID on financial markets was. This could be
directly applied in technical analysis as incorporating information from the CDC could
drastically improve stock performance.

We suggest that technical analysts who utilize a stock screener consider how to
factor the pandemic into how they segment out their stocks. It appears that even though
the price of funeral home stock could be explained by the stock market price, the stock
market could not explain the trading patterns of our funeral home stock. This is interesting
in that perception of stock performance is traditionally contingent on stock price.

Our finding does not support this traditional misunderstanding. Our visuals show
that a stock may correlate closer to its business segment than to the stock market. The final
graphic demonstrates this relationship very clearly. The green line is trading activity for
the Nasdaq from March through September. You can see visually the inverse relationship,
COVID went up and stock activity (Volume) fell. The COVID information is a lag indicator as
it took time for accurate reporting, this accounts for the large jumps from month to month.
Similarly, fear led to significant initial swings in the stock market, thus a steady
decline in activity. You will notice that right as trader confidence began to turn around in
July, reporting for COVID increased from expanded testing. This led to the largest influx in
cases and thus another decline in the volume of Nasdaq stock.

Looking at different US states for the spread of COVID-19 Cases, the states with bigger
circles represents higher number of COVID-19 Cases. The spread across the states shows
non-uniformity in terms of geographic spread. However, states with bigger population such
as New York, California, Florida, Texas showed higher number of COVID-19 Cases.

According to
the Census Bureau,
the top 4 of the
most populated
states in the
United States are:
1.

California

2. Texas
3. Florida
4. New York

The number of COVID-19 Cases somewhat represents the population density affecting the
spread around different states. Another observation can be seen from the density map that,
the North Western portion of the US has been less affected with COVID compared to the

North Eastern counterpart; the Southern region however, is affected equally across the
States.

If we look further and compare the total COVID-19 Cases with States and Month
from the Table with heatmap we can see the number of cases piling up in a faster pace from
month to month among the top COVID-19 affected states. However, the number of total
cases died down a little bit during September. We can also observe the month of August
having the highest number of cases across all the states.

Looking at the bottom COVID-19 affected states we can see similar pattern in case number
with rather low numbers but with a rising rate in case number until August then slowing

down in September.

Knowing this geographic data has real-world application. By understanding
population densities and the spread of this virus, government agencies will be able to
better prepare in the future for rapid response initiatives. This would likely be ideal rather
than employing a national response. That is, rapidly deploy response measures to high
density population states first, then when available, go to the second-tier populations and
use a more pragmatic approach.

DISCUSSION

Our analysis brought together four distinct datasets: COVID-19 deaths, COVID-19
cases, funeral home stocks, and the NASDAQ index. Separate, the stock data would yield
normal financial market information. However, when combining these sets together and
looking at market volume and/or stock highs in comparison to COVID-19 cases and deaths,
much more valuable insights could be had on investing strategies during a natural disaster
or pandemic response. Through all the datasets, the common element we used to merge
was based on the date. Since financial markets are five days per week and the report for
COVID-19 varied, we based the merging of datasets on week number to avoid errors in
merging.
There are elements of natural processing our visualizations adhere to. In particular,
using consistent colors within the visual to help understand, however, we did not use 3-

dimensional visualizations which humans can process even better. Additionally, from
visual to visual, there are different colors even though it may have been discussing the
same metric. This is in part because some visualizations were done in Python and some
were done in Tableau.
Another shortcoming in our project was data quality. There were missing data
elements for COVID-19 deaths and cases at the state level. As previously discussed, we
addressed this and completed the data, however, due to inconsistencies in COVID-19
tracking and tabulation, we cannot say with absolute certainty we fully trust the data.
Despite some of this missing data, we were able to successfully find meaningful
correlations across the data.
In our primary correlation matrix (See file: CorrelationPrimary), we found both
positive and negative correlations crossing the stock and COVID-19 datasets. Interestingly,
we found stronger negative correlations when looking at pneumonia deaths than COVID-19
deaths. And, while stocks had positive correlations, the volume of stocks (the amount of
actual trading) had negative correlations which could imply emotional rather than logical
responses to the pandemic as previously discussed in the Results.

Our secondary correlation (See file: CorrelationSecondary) was a correlation matrix
looking at the United States as a whole instead of at the state level. This data did not have
missing data and yield significantly larger correlations.

Our suspicion is meaningful correlations may have been lost when spreading out the
analysis across states as opposed of the entire picture. The old saying of “lose site of the
forest for the trees” may ring true here. And, while it’s true that pneumonia had a stronger
correlation with the market than COVID-19 in the primary output, it was even stronger in
the secondary correlation output when looking at the United States as a whole.

CONCLUSION

When pandemics hits, people’s lives are at stake. This is to be taken more seriously
than a business’ simple profit and loss. This is the difference between life and death. Our
hypothesis was partially supported, as well as partially refuted. However, important
lessons can be taken from this analysis. In particular, focusing on the big picture of a
pandemic and targeting strategical locales for rapid response. Second, knowing that stock
markets do not respond rationally to emergencies. That is, key assumptions based on
industry may not hold up during times of crisis. Finally, while other illnesses may be
causing similar deaths and case loads, the amount of attention paid to them seems to have
at least an equal bearing on the market responses. It’s important to not neglect the analysis
of the whole when possible at the detriment of seeing just how significant of a correlation
that may exist. This was clearly demonstrated in our two correlation matrices side by side.

WORKS CITED

Baker, S., Bloom, N., Davis, S. Kost, K., Sammon, M., Viratyosin, T. (2020). The Unprecedented
Stock Market Reaction to COVID-19 [White paper]. Becker Friedman Institute,
University of Chicago. https://bfi.uchicago.edu/wp-content/uploads/BFI_White-
Paper_Davis_3.2020.pdf
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020, September 23). United States COVID-19
Cases and Deaths by State over Time. Retrieved from https://data.cdc.gov/Case-
Surveillance/United-States-COVID-19-Cases-and-Deaths-by-State-o/9mfq-cb36
Yahoo Finance. (2020, September 23). NASDAQ Composite. Retrieved from
https://finance.yahoo.com/quote/%5EIXIC?p=^IXIC
Yahoo Finance. (2020, September 23). Carriage Services, Inc. Retrieved from
https://finance.yahoo.com/quote/csv/history
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2020, September 23). Provisional COVID-19
Death Counts by Week Ending Date and State. Retrieved from
https://data.cdc.gov/NCHS/Provisional-COVID-19-Death-Counts-by-Week-Ending-
D/r8kw-7aab
